.TH "hmmindex" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
hmmindex - create a binary SSI index for an HMM database

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hmmindex
.I [options]
.I database

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B hmmindex
is a utility that creates a binary SSI ("squid sequence index"
format) index for an HMM database file called
.I database.
The new index file is named
.IR database.ssi.
An SSI index file is required for 
.B hmmfetch
to work, and also for the PVM implementation of 
.B hmmpfam.

The HMM's name is stored as the primary retrieval key. If it has an
optional accession, the accession is used as a secondary retrieval
key. For Pfam HMMs, which have accessions structured as
.I <accession>.<version>, 
the default is to store the full
.I <accession>.<version>
as the retrieval key, so you would have to do 
.B hmmfetch 
.I <database> 
.I <accession>.<version>
to retrieve an HMM by its accession.

It is also useful to be able to retrieve the appropriate version
without having to keep track of what version is in the current Pfam
release, by
.B hmmfetch 
.I <database> <accession>.
The 
.B --av
option is provided for indexing 
.I <accession> 
by itself. This is
not the default, because it assumes that accessions obey the
specific Pfam structure of 
.I <accession>.<version>,
and that
the 
.I <accession> 
has one and only one version in the indexed
.I database.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options, including expert options.

.SH EXPERT OPTIONS

.TP
.B --av
Index both <accession>.<version> and <accession> as secondary
retrieval keys. For example, model PF00069.15 is indexed and may be
retreived by its name (Pkinase), its accession (PF00069), and its full
accession.version (PF00069.15); all three must be unique in the 
indexed
.I database.




