.TH "hmmconvert" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "HMMER @RELEASE@" "HMMER Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
hmmconvert - convert between profile HMM file formats

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hmmconvert
.I [options]
.I oldhmmfile
.I newhmmfile

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B hmmconvert
reads an HMM file from
.I oldhmmfile
in any HMMER format, and writes it to a new file
.I newhmmfile 
in a new format.
.I oldhmmfile 
and 
.I newhmmfile
must be different files; you can't reliably overwrite 
the old file.
By default, the new HMM file is written in HMMER 2
ASCII format. 

Available formats are HMMER 2 ASCII (default), HMMER 2 binary
.I (-b)
GCG profile 
.I (-p)
, and Compugen XSW extended profile 
.I (-P).

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -a 
Convert to HMMER 2 ASCII file. This is the default, so this option
is unnecessary.

.TP 
.B -b 
Convert to HMMER 2 binary file. 

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options, including expert options.

.TP
.B -p
Convert to GCG profile .prf format.

.TP 
.B -A
Append mode; append to
.I newhmmfile
rather than creating a new file. 

.TP
.B -F
Force; if 
.I newhmmfile
already exists, and
.I -A 
is not being used to append to the file,
hmmconvert will refuse to clobber the existing
file unless 
.I -F 
is used.

.TP
.B -P
Convert the HMM to Compugen XSW extended profile format,
which is similar to GCG profile format but has two
extra columns for delete-open and delete-extend costs.
(I do not believe that Compugen publicly supports this
format; it may be undocumented.)

.SH SEE ALSO

.PP
Master man page, with full list of and guide to the individual man
pages: see 
.B hmmer(1).
.PP
A User guide and tutorial came with the distribution:
.B Userguide.ps
[Postscript] and/or
.B Userguide.pdf
[PDF].
.PP
Finally, all documentation is also available online via WWW: 
.B http://hmmer.wustl.edu/

.SH AUTHOR

This software and documentation is: 
.nf
@COPYRIGHT@
@LICENSE@
.fi
See the file COPYING in your distribution for complete details.

.nf
Sean Eddy
HHMI/Dept. of Genetics
Washington Univ. School of Medicine
4566 Scott Ave.
St Louis, MO 63110 USA
Phone: 1-314-362-7666
FAX  : 1-314-362-7855
Email: eddy@genetics.wustl.edu
.fi


