.TH "hmmpgmd" 1 "@HMMER_DATE@" "HMMER @HMMER_VERSION@" "HMMER Manual"

.SH NAME
hmmpgmd - daemon for searching a protein query against a protein database 


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hmmpgmd
.I [options]


.SH DESCRIPTION

.PP
.B hmmpgmd 
is the daemon that we use internally for the hmmer.org web server, 
and essentially stands in front of the protein search programs
.B phmmer, 
.B hmmsearch,
and 
.B hmmscan. 

To use
.B hmmpgmd, 
first an instance must be started up as a 
.I master 
server, and provided with at least one of a 
.I <seqdb>
(using the 
.B --seqdb
flag)
and an 
.I <hmmdb>
(using the
.B --hmmdb
flag). The input database(s) will be loaded into memory by the 
master. The master has finished loading the database(s) when it 
prints the line:
.br
.RS 6
Data loaded into memory. Master is ready.
.RE

.LP
Only after master is ready, one or more instances of hmmpgmd may
be started as workers. These workers may be (and typically are) on
different machines from the master, but must have access to the 
same database file(s) provided to the master, with the same path. As 
with the master, each worker loads the database(s) into memory, and 
indicates completion by printing:
.br
.RS 6
Data loaded into memory. Worker is ready.
.RE

.PP
The master server and workers are expected to remain running.
One or more clients then connect to the master and submit possibly
many queries. The master distributes the work of a query among the
workers, collects results, and merges them before responding to the
client. Two example client programs are included in the HMMER3.1 src 
directory - the C program
.B hmmc2
and the perl script
.B hmmpgmd_client_example.pl.
These are intended as examples only, and should be extended as 
necessary to meet your needs. 

Queries are submitted to the master from the client as a character
string. They may be the sort of query that would normally be handled
by 
.B phmmer
(protein sequence vs protein database),
.B hmmsearch
(protein hmm query vs protein database), or
.B hmmscan
(protein query vs protein hmm database).
 

The general form of a client query is:
.RS 6
@[options]
.br
(fasta sequence) or (hmm text)
.br
//
.RE

.PP
For example, to perform a 
.B phmmer
type search, the client submits the following text in order to query
the given sequence against the subset of the sequence database
files that belong to sequence database #2.
.br
.RS 6
@--seqdb 2
.br
>seq
.br
MGPSENDPNLFVALYDFVASGDNTLSITKGEKLRVLGYNHNGEWCEAQTKNGQGWVP
.br
//
.RE

.PP
To perform an
.B hmmsearch 
type search, the protein sequence will be replaced by the full
text content of a HMMER-format HMM file. 

.PP
To perform an
.B hmmscan 
type search, the search will match that of the 
.B phmmer
type search, except that the first line will change to 
.br
.RS 6
@--hmmdb 1
.RE
.br
(currently, only a single hmm database can be supported).

.PP
The result of each query is an undocumented data structure in 
binary format. In the future the data will be returned in a proper
serialized structure, but for now, it requires meticulous unpacking
within the client. The example clients show how this is done.

 

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Help; print a brief reminder of command line usage and all available
options.



.SH EXPERT OPTIONS

.TP 
.BI --master
Run as the master server.

.TP
.BI --worker " <s>"
Run as a worker, connecting to the master server that is running on IP
address
.I <s>.

.TP 
.BI --daemon
Run as a daemon using config file: /etc/hmmpgmd.conf

.TP 
.BI --cport " <n>"
Port to use for communication between clients and the master server. 
The default is 51371.

.TP 
.BI --wport " <n>"
Port to use for communication between workers and the master server. 
The default is 51372.

.TP 
.BI --ccncts " <n>"
Maximum number of client connections to accept. The default is 16.

.TP 
.BI --wcncts " <n>"
Maximum number of worker connections to accept. The default is 32.

.TP 
.BI --pid " <f>"
Name of file into which the process id will be written. 

.TP 
.BI --seqdb " <f>"
Name of the file (in hmmpgmd format) containing protein sequences.
The contents of this file will be cached for searches. 

.TP 
.BI --hmmdb " <f>"
Name of the file containing protein HMMs. The contents of this file 
will be cached for searches.

.TP 
.BI --cpu " <n>"
Number of parallel threads to use (for 
.I --worker
).


.SH SEE ALSO 

See 
.B hmmer(1)
for a master man page with a list of all the individual man pages
for programs in the HMMER package.

.PP
For complete documentation, see the user guide that came with your
HMMER distribution (Userguide.pdf); or see the HMMER web page
(@HMMER_URL@).



.SH COPYRIGHT

.nf
@HMMER_COPYRIGHT@
@HMMER_LICENSE@
.fi

For additional information on copyright and licensing, see the file
called COPYRIGHT in your HMMER source distribution, or see the HMMER
web page 
(@HMMER_URL@).


.SH AUTHOR

.nf
Eddy/Rivas Laboratory
Janelia Farm Research Campus
19700 Helix Drive
Ashburn VA 20147 USA
http://eddylab.org
.fi



