nwo/Dependencies.md, before:


## overview

| group        | depends on group(s)    |
|--------------|------------------------|
| base         |                        |
| models       | base                   |
| using models | base, models           |
| DP matrices  | base, models           |
| reference DP | base, models, matrices |


### base 

| .c file   | within-group dependencies |
|-----------|---------------------------|
| `logsum`  |                           |
| `simdvec` |                           |
| `general` | `logsum`                  |


### models 

Depends on _base_.

| .c file      | within-group dependencies |
|--------------|---------------------------|
| `h4_mode`    |                           |
| `h4_prior`   |                           |
| `h4_profile` |                           |
| `h4_counts`  | `h4_profile`              |
| `h4_hmmfile` | `h4_profile`              |
| `h4_path`    | `h4_mode`, `h4_profile`, `h4_counts`  |


### construction

Depends on _base_, _models_.

| .c file        | within-group dependencies    |
|----------------|------------------------------|
| `emit`         |                              |
| `modelsample`  |                              |
| `modelstats`   |                              |
| `parameterize` |                              | 
| `standardize`  |                              |
| `vectorize`    |                              |
| `zigar`        |                              |



### advanced construction

Depends on _base_, _models_, _construction_.

| .c file        | within-group dependencies    |
|----------------|------------------------------|
| `eweight`      |                              |
| `build`        | `eweight`                    |



### DP matrices

Depends on _base_, _models_.

| .c file        | within-group dependencies    |
|----------------|------------------------------|
| `h4_filtermx`  |                              |
| `h4_refmx`     |                              |


### reference DP

Depends on _base_, _models_, _matrices_.

| .c file        | within-group dependencies    |
|----------------|------------------------------|
| `reference_dp` |                              |


### vector DP

Depends on _base_, _models_, _matrices_.

| .c file         | within-group dependencies    |
|-----------------|------------------------------|
| `ssvfilter*`    |                              |
| `vitfilter*`    |                              |


### hmmer itself

Depends on everything.

| .c file         | within-group dependencies    |
|-----------------|------------------------------|
| `cmd_build`     |                              |
| `hmmer`         | `cmd_*`                      |

Commit message:

Adds test driver and benchmark driver to F/B filter.
F/B filter (SSE) is now ~20% faster, after revisions to the "lazy F"
DD path evaluation. Putting the underflow test (_mm_movemask_ps)
inside the inner loop is a small win. Unlike H3, testing for early
stopping is always superior to full serialization of the DD paths, so
I simplified the code.

Initial performance tests were terrifyingly poor, because I forgot
that the F/B filter is uniquely sensitive to hardware configuration of
denormalized floating point computation. On x86, denormals must be
off, DAZ and FTZ flags need to be set for best performance. The
difference is about 3x. Added notes so I don't forget again; added
`h4_simdvec_Init()` call in `h4_Init()` main initialization routine.

[SRE H7/40,44]

nwo/Dependencies.md, after:


## overview

| group        | depends on group(s)    |
|--------------|------------------------|
| base         |                        |
| models       | base                   |
| using models | base, models           |
| DP matrices  | base, models           |
| reference DP | base, models, matrices |


### base 

| .c file   | within-group dependencies |
|-----------|---------------------------|
| `logsum`  |                           |
| `simdvec` |                           |
| `general` | `logsum`,`simdvec`        |


### models 

Depends on _base_.

| .c file      | within-group dependencies |
|--------------|---------------------------|
| `h4_mode`    |                           |
| `h4_prior`   |                           |
| `h4_profile` |                           |
| `h4_counts`  | `h4_profile`              |
| `h4_hmmfile` | `h4_profile`              |
| `h4_path`    | `h4_mode`, `h4_profile`, `h4_counts`  |


### construction

Depends on _base_, _models_.

| .c file        | within-group dependencies    |
|----------------|------------------------------|
| `emit`         |                              |
| `modelsample`  |                              |
| `modelstats`   |                              |
| `parameterize` |                              | 
| `standardize`  |                              |
| `vectorize`    |                              |
| `zigar`        |                              |



### advanced construction

Depends on _base_, _models_, _construction_.

| .c file        | within-group dependencies    |
|----------------|------------------------------|
| `eweight`      |                              |
| `build`        | `eweight`                    |



### DP matrices

Depends on _base_, _models_.

| .c file        | within-group dependencies    |
|----------------|------------------------------|
| `h4_refmx`     |                              |
| `h4_filtermx`  |                              |
| `h4_checkptmx` | [*]                          |

[*] Depends on `h4_refmx` when `eslDEBUGLEVEL` is on.


### reference DP

Depends on _base_, _models_, _matrices_.

| .c file        | within-group dependencies    |
|----------------|------------------------------|
| `reference_dp` |                              |


### vector DP

Depends on _base_, _models_, _matrices_.

| .c file         | within-group dependencies    |
|-----------------|------------------------------|
| `ssvfilter*`    |                              |
| `vitfilter*`    |                              |
| `fbfilter*`     |                              |

### hmmer itself

Depends on everything.

| .c file         | within-group dependencies    |
|-----------------|------------------------------|
| `cmd_build`     |                              |
| `hmmer`         | `cmd_*`                      |
