.TH "hmmfetch" 1 @RELEASEDATE@ "HMMER @RELEASE@" "HMMER Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
hmmfetch - retrieve an HMM from an HMM database

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hmmfetch
.I [options]
.I database
.I name

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B hmmfetch
is a small utility that retrieves an HMM called
.I name
from a HMMER model database called
.I database.
in a new format, 
and prints that model to standard output.
For example,
.I hmmfetch Pfam rrm
retrieves the RRM (RNA recognition motif) model from
Pfam, if the environment variable HMMERDB is
set to the location of the Pfam database.
The retrieved HMM file is written in HMMER 2 ASCII format.

.PP
The database must have an associated GSI index file.
To index an HMM database, use the program
.B hmmindex.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options, including expert options.



.SH SEE ALSO

.PP
Master man page, with full list of and guide to the individual man
pages: see 
.B hmmer(1).
.PP
A User guide and tutorial came with the distribution:
.B Userguide.ps
[Postscript] and/or
.B Userguide.pdf
[PDF].
.PP
Finally, all documentation is also available online via WWW: 
.B http://hmmer.wustl.edu/

.SH AUTHOR

This software and documentation is: 
.nf
@COPYRIGHT@
@LICENSE@
.fi
See the file COPYING in your distribution for complete details.

.nf
Sean Eddy
HHMI/Dept. of Genetics
Washington Univ. School of Medicine
4566 Scott Ave.
St Louis, MO 63110 USA
Phone: 1-314-362-7666
FAX  : 1-314-362-7855
Email: eddy@genetics.wustl.edu
.fi
