\section{Acknowledgements and history}

HMMER 1 was developed on slow weekends in the lab at the MRC
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge UK, while I was a postdoc
with Richard Durbin and John Sulston. I thank the Human Frontier
Science Program and the National Institutes of Health for their
enlightened support at a time when I was supposed to be working on the
genetics of neural development in \emph{C. elegans}.

The first public release of HMMER (1.8) came in April 1995, shortly
after I moved to Washington University in St. Louis. A few bugfix
releases followed. A number of more serious modifications and
improvements went into HMMER 1.9 code, but 1.9 was never
released. Some versions of HMMER 1.9 escaped St. Louis and make it to
some genome centers, but 1.9 was never supported. HMMER 1.9 collapsed
under its own weight in 1996.

HMMER 2 was a nearly complete rewrite, based on the new Plan 7 model
architecture, begun in November 1996. I thank the Washington
University Dept. of Genetics, the NIH National Human Genome Research
Institute, and Monsanto for their support during this time.  I also
thank the Biochemistry Academic Contacts Committee at Eli Lilly \&
Co. for a gift that paid for the trusty Linux laptop on which much of
HMMER 2 was written. Much of HMMER2 was written in coffee shops,
airport lounges, transoceanic flights, and Graeme Mitchison's
kitchen. The source code still contains a disjointed record of where
and when various bits were written.

HMMER then settled into a comfortable middle age, like its primary
author: actively maintained, though dramatic changes seemed
increasingly unlikely. HMMER 2.1.1 was the stable release for three
years, from 1998-2001.  HMMER 2.2g was intended to be a beta release,
but became the \emph{de facto} stable release for two more years,
2001-2003. The final release of the HMMER2 series, 2.3, was assembled
in spring 2003.  The last bugfix release, 2.3.2, came out in October
2003.

If the world worked as I hoped, the combination of our 1998 book
\emph{Biological Sequence Analysis} and the existence of HMMER2 as a
proof of principle ought to have motivated the widespread adoption of
probabilistic modeling methods for sequence database searching. We
would declare Victory and move on. Richard Durbin moved on to human
genomics; Anders Krogh moved on to pioneer a number of other
probabilistic approaches for other biological sequence analysis
problems; Graeme Mitchison moved on to quantum computing; I moved on
to noncoding structural RNAs.

Yet BLAST continued (and indeed, continues) to be the most widely used
search program.  HMMs seemed to be widely considered to be a
mysterious and orthogonal black box, rather than a natural theoretical
basis for important applications like BLAST. The NCBI seemed to be
slow to adopt HMM methods. This nagged at me; the revolution was
unfinished!

When we moved to Janelia Farm in 2006, I had to make a decision about
what we should spend time on. It had to be something ``Janelian'':
something that I would work on with my own hands; something difficult
to accomplish under the usual reward structures of academic science;
something that would make a difference. I decided that we should aim
to replace BLAST with an entirely new generation of software. The
result is the HMMER3 project.

\subsection{Thanks}

HMMER is now not just my own work, but also the work of several people
who have come through my lab and other collaborators, including
contributions from Bill Arndt, Dawn Brooks, Nick Carter, Sergi
Castellano, Alex Coventry, Michael Farrar, Rob Finn, Ian Holmes, Steve
Johnson, Bjarne Knudsen, Diana Kolbe, Eric Nawrocki, Elena Rivas, Walt
Shands, and Travis Wheeler.  The current HMMER development team
includes Nick and myself at Harvard, and Travis at the University of
Montana.

We thank James Cuff and his Odyssey team for our computing environment
at Harvard, and Goran Ceric and his team for our previous environment
at Janelia Farm.  Without the skills of the teams at high-performance
computing centers, we would be nowhere. HMMER testing now spins up
thousands of processors at a time, an unearthly amount of computing
power.

Over the years, the MRC-LMB computational molecular biology discussion
group contributed many ideas to HMMER. In particular, I thank Richard
Durbin, Graeme Mitchison, Erik Sonnhammer, Alex Bateman, Ewan Birney,
Gos Micklem, Tim Hubbard, Roger Sewall, David MacKay, and Cyrus
Chothia.

The UC Santa Cruz HMM group, led by David Haussler and including
Richard Hughey, Kevin Karplus, Anders Krogh (now back in Copenhagen)
and Kimmen Sj\"{o}lander, has been a source of knowledge, friendly
competition, and occasional collaboration. All scientific competitors
should be so gracious. The Santa Cruz folks have never complained, at
least not in my earshot, that HMMER started as simply a
re-implementation of their original ideas, just to teach myself what
HMMs were.

In many places, I've reimplemented algorithms described in the
literature. These are too numerous to thank here. The original
references are given in the code. However, I've borrowed more than
once from the following folks that I'd like to be sure to thank: Steve
Altschul, Pierre Baldi, Phillip Bucher, Warren Gish, Steve and Jorja
Henikoff, Anders Krogh, and Bill Pearson.

HMMER is primarily developed on Apple OS/X and GNU/Linux machines, but
is tested on a variety of hardware. Over the years, Compaq, IBM,
Intel, Sun Microsystems, Silicon Graphics, Hewlett-Packard, Paracel,
and nVidia have provided generous hardware support that makes this
possible. I'm endebted to the free software community for the
development tools I use: an incomplete list includes GNU gcc, gdb,
emacs, and autoconf; valgrind; Subversion and Git; perl and python;
LaTeX and TeX; PolyglotMan; and the UNIX and Linux operating systems.

Finally, I cryptically thank Dave ``Mr. Frog'' Pare and Tom
``Chainsaw'' Ruschak for an unrelated free software product that was
historically instrumental in HMMER's development, for reasons that are
best not discussed while sober.

\label{manualend}
